# Poincare-Birkhoff-Witt theorem

## Project Topic

In this project, we aim to formalize the Poincare-Birkhoff-Witt theorem, which ultimately serves to give a basis for the universal enveloping algebra for a given Lie algebra.

## Background

The universal enveloping algebra is used to understand representations of a given Lie algebra. Directly, we consider a representation as a bilinear map g sending an element of the Lie algebra and the vector space it acts on to a new element of the vector space it acts on, such that [X,Y].v = X.(Y.v)-Y.(X.v). If we consider the composition of representations as a representation of an element from the tensor algebra, as in (X tensor Y).v = X.(Y.v), then the set of all "actions" exists as the tensor algebra, up to the relation [X,Y] = X tensor Y - Y tensor X. If we quotient the tensor algebra by the ideal generated by this relation, we get the universal enveloping algebra. Thanks to this construction, the category of representations of a Lie algebra is isomorphic to the category of left modules of the associated universal enveloping algebra. 

Thus, if we can understand the structure of the universal enveloping algebra, we can understand the structure of representations of its Lie algebra. The Poincare-Birkhoff-Witt theorem essentially states that the vector space structure of the universal enveloping algebra of a Lie algebra is isomorphic to the vector space structure of the symmetric algebra of a Lie algebra, with the two only differing by their algebra products. This isomorphism is constructed on the filtrations of these structures, where the nth filtration consists of the submodule of elements whose terms are the tensors of at most n elements.

(I don't know which sources to site, given that I pulled this all off the top of my head?)

## Definitions

A grading of a ring is a set of (necessarily abelian) groups indexed by a monoid, where the direct sum of all such groups is isomorphic to the additive group structure of the ring, and if we define a product on this direct sum by the isomorphism, then the product of an element in the ith group and an element in the jth group lies in the (i+j)th group. Algebras are graded as rings, forgetting their scalar multiplication structure. 

A filtration of an algebra is a set of subspaces of the vector space structure of the algebra indexed by the natural numbers (with zero), such that each subspace lies in the next, each contains {0}, the union of all subspaces is the entire algebra, and the product of an element in the ith subspace and an element in the jth subspace lies in the (i+j)th subspace.

Every algebra graded by the natural numbers has an associated filtration structure, where the nth filtration is the direct sum of the first n grades. Conversely, there is a graded algebra associated to any given fitered algebra, where the nth grade is the nth filtration modulo the (n-1)th filtration, with the 0th grade being the 0th filtration.

The tensor algebra of a given vector space has the vector space structure of the direct sum of the tensor of n copies of the base vector space, where n ranges over the natural numbers. The algebra product consists of the linear expansion of the tensor product, sending the tensor of n elements and the tensor of m elements to the tensor of (n+m) elements. This gives the tensor algebra a natural grading structure, where the nth grade consists of the copy of the tensor of n copies of the base as in the definition.

The symmetric algebra of a given vector space is the tensor algebra of the given vector space, modulo the ideal generated by elements of the form x tensor y - y tensor x. The grading strucutre of the tensor algebra descends naturally to the symmetric algebra.

The universal enveloping algebra of a given vector space is the tensor algebra of the given vector space, modulo the ideal generated by elements of the form x tensor y - y tensor x - [x,y]. The grading strucutre of the tensor algebra does not descend naturally, since elements in the ideal spans multiple grades, but the filtered structure remains.

The Poincare-Birkhoff-Witt theorem states that the graded algebra associated to the universal enveloping algebra is isomorphic to the graded algebra structure on the symmetric algebra.

# Lean File Structure / Constructions and Theorems Formalized

The file starts with formalizing the filtered algebra, and attempts to build the conversions between filtered algebras and graded algebras. The filtered algebra is on 14-19. The conversions are on 154-170, with associated constructions on lines 26-150.

We then define the symmetric algebra, and build the descended grading on it directly. The algebra itself is constructed on lines 189-195, with structures imposed on lines 199-206. The grading is done from lines 216-326. 

Finally, we begin defining the filtration on the universal enveloping algebra. It is "done" on lines 330-338, although there's not really anything there.
